---
slug: ghc-update-2022-07
title: GHC July 2022 Update
authors: [sylvain]
tags: [ghc]
---


This is the July 2022 monthly update from the GHC DevX team at IOG.

## JavaScript Backend for GHC

For a few months we have been merging GHCJS (Haskell to JavaScript compiler)
into GHC. We set our first milestone to be the ability to compile and to run the
usual "Hello World" program. This month we finally reached it!

We are now focusing on:

- fixing failing tests in GHC's testsuite (~2800 unexpected failures). To do that, we
  have to implement new primops, to fix bugs we introduced while we ported the
  code from GHCJS, etc.

- implementing support for the "js-sources" Cabal stanza in Hadrian. Currently
  the JS backend finds the JS sources required for the RTS and for base into
  explicitly defined location. It was only a stop-gap measure and we now need to
  implement proper support for user-provided JavaScript files.

- documenting and refactoring the source code and making it similar to other GHC
  modules. As an example, GHCJS used the text package which isn't a boot
  package. Hence we first switched to use GHC's ShortText implementation and now
  we switched to a FastString based implementation.

- adding back GHCJS's features that we haven't ported for some reasons (e.g. the
  compactor, TH, etc.).

You can follow our progress on our development branch
[here](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/tree/wip/js-staging).

## Blog posts

For the time being, we will focus blog post topics on GHCJS internals and
related topics. A few of these blog posts are currently under review and should
be published shortly.
