---
slug: 2022-08-18-js-backend-ffi
title: GHCJS FFI system in the JS Backend
date: Aug 18, 2022
authors: [ doyougnu ]
tags: [ghc, javascript, ffi, explanation, knowledge_engineering]
---

# Table of Contents

1.  [The Design Space](#orgcf7b9df)
2.  [GHCJS&rsquo;s FFI](#orgdca8008)
3.  [Lightweight safety checks](#org461ca2a)
4.  [Returning multiple values](#orge4568be)
5.  [Changes in the FFI System for the JS Backend](#org87ce79c)

Users of GHCJS enjoyed a rich
[FFI](https://github.com/ghcjs/ghcjs/blob/master/doc/foreign-function-interface.md)
system for foreign JavaScript imports. However, this has changed during our
adaptation of GHCJS to GHC 9.x. This short post goes over the GHCJS FFI system,
the motivation for these changes and what the changes are. First, we must
consider the design space of an FFI system.


<a id="orgcf7b9df"></a>

# The Design Space

FFI code is typically employed in high performance scenarios. Additionally,
users of the FFI *do not* want to deal with the object language the compiler is
compiling to. Instead, users want a simple way to call functions from the object
language and use them in their own code as normal Haskell functions. However,
users of the FFI system *do* tend to be power users, and so as a design principle
we want to expose the tools they need to achieve their performance needs,
whatever those needs may be. We can summarize these constraints as follows:

1.  The FFI must abstract the JavaScript backend&rsquo;s infidelities away as much as
    possible. That is, users of the FFI *should* need to worry about the `Int64#`
    representation, but should also be able to simply follow standard patterns we
    have written in `base`.
2.  The FFI must provide tools to achieve high performance code, even if those
    tools require up front knowledge of the runtime system to use. However, these
    tools should not be in the path of least resistance to use the FFI system.
3.  The FFI must provide a lightweight specification that user&rsquo;s program against
    for the JS backend to optimize the imported function and for good error
    messages for users.

GHCJS&rsquo;s FFI sets a high (qualitative) benchmark on these three constraints.
Let&rsquo;s inspect them each in detail, in no particular order.


<a id="orgdca8008"></a>

# GHCJS&rsquo;s FFI

In GHCJS, a user could take advantage of JavaScript functions in their Haskell
code using the GHCJS&rsquo;s FFI. However, the syntax was unique to GHCJS with place
holder variables like one might see in perl, nix, or bash. For example, here is
a foreign import from the `base` library for `st_size`:

    -- base/System/Posix/Internal.hs
    -- the JS FFI version
    foreign import javascript unsafe "$r1 = h$base_st_size($1_1,$1_2); $r2 = h$ret1;"
       st_size :: Ptr CStat -> IO Int64

The syntax is different from what we know and love in the normal Haskell world
but the grammar is straightforward. We declare a `foreign import` from `javascript`,
state that the import is `unsafe` or `interruptible` and then provide a string,
`h$base_fstat(...)` for the code generator to use when compiling. Compare this
with the C version:

    -- base/System/Posix/Internal.hs
    -- the C FFI version
    foreign import ccall unsafe "HsBase.h __hscore_st_size"
       st_size :: Ptr CStat -> IO Int64

And we see that they are similar. The only difference is the strange `$n`
symbols in the referrent string. Contrast this with the C version, which simply
declares a name.

These symbols are *place holder* variables with special meaning in GHCJS. There
are two intractable reasons for the placeholder patterns. First, we require
these patterns to work around the limitations of JavaScript as a backend (1).
For example, consider the case where we need to return an `Int64#` from an
imported foreign function. In C and Haskell this is not a problem because both
can represent `Int64#` natively, however JavaScript only has native support for
32-bit values. Thus, to be able to return an `Int64#` we need to have a method to
return two 32-bit numbers. Similarly, in order to apply a function to an `Int64#`
that function must take at least two arguments, one for the high bits and one
for the low. Second, the referrent string is untyped and can contain arbritrary
JavaScript code. So placeholder patterns provide a simply and lightweight way
for safety checks and eliminate classes of untyped, hard to understand errors.
For example, consider an arity mismatch error between a function definition and
call site. When this happens JavaScript happily continues processing with the
return value from the function application defined as `NaN` (of course). Such
arity conflicts can easily occur, especially when dealing with 64-bit values
which require function arity assumptions.


<a id="org461ca2a"></a>

# Lightweight safety checks

Lightweight safety checks (3) are done by GHCJS by parsing the names of the
place holder variables; each of which follows a specific naming convention. This
convention is:

-   Argument types:
    -   `$n`: Used for unary arguments, i.e., arguments which require only a single register.
    -   `$n_n`: Used for binary arguments, i.e., arguments which require two registers.
    -   `$c`: A continuation argument, only valid for `interruptible` foreign functions.
-   Return types:
    -   `$r`: a unary return
    -   `$r1`, `$r2`: a binary return
    -   `$r1`, `$r2`, `$r3_1`, `$r3_2`: unboxed tuple return
-   Top level patterns:
    -   `"&value"`: simply emitted as `value` by the code generator
    -   `"someFunction"`: emitted as `ret = someFunction(...)`, i.e., map the FFI to
        the result of the function call.
    -   `"$r = $1.f($2)"`: emitted as `r1 = a1.f(a2)`, i.e., a combination of a
        function call and a property access.

With this standard GHCJS then parses the FFI referrent string to ensure that it
conforms to this standard. If not then GHCJS can at least respond to the user
with an ill-formatted FFI message *and* say precisely where the issue is. For
example, it could respond that only half of an `Int64#` is returned based on the
referrent string and the function type.


<a id="orge4568be"></a>

# Returning multiple values

But what of performant code? GHCJS achieves performant FFI by not trying to
abstract away from the runtime system. Instead, an advantage of GHCJS&rsquo;s FFI *is*
that we can specify exactly which registers the foreign function should dump its
results or even arbitrary global variables. This places more burden on the user
of the FFI in specific scenarios, but crucially allows the FFI system to get out
of the way of the user. The FFI system also exploits this capability to return
multiple values from a single function call, which is a common need when
compiling to JavaScript. For example, in the above code `st_size` is declared to
return an `IO Int64`, the JavaScript handler `h$base_st_size` returns the `Int64`
using two registers `$r1` and `$r2`, but does so through the use of a special
purpose global variable called `h$ret1`:

    function h$base_st_size(stat, stat_off) {
        h$ret1 = (stat.i3[(stat_off>>2)+2]);
        return (stat.i3[(stat_off>>2)+1]);
    }

The function inputs a pointer and an offset. Pointers in GHCJS are simply
pointers to ByteArrays so the function indexes into the ByteArray and retrieves
and stores the lower 32-bits in `h$ret1`, then returns the higher 32-bits
directly. These results are picked up by the FFI code, which performs assignment
to set `$r1` to the result of the function call (the higher 32-bits), and set `$r2`
to the value of `h$ret1` (the lower 32-bits). Crucially, the runtime system needs
to do nothing. The registers are already handled ready to be consumed by
whatever the caller of the foreign function will do.

One might consider using a simpler design, which trades register juggling for a
more straightforward representation such as a ByteArray which stores the `Int64#`.
However, such a design would trade speed for implementation simplicity. If we
passed ByteArrays then each foreign function would spend time wrapping and
unwrapping the array to get the payload; clearly an undesirable outcome for high
performance code.


<a id="org87ce79c"></a>

# Changes in the FFI System for the JS Backend

So we see that GHCJS&rsquo;s FFI system actually performs quite well in the design
space. Power users are well supported and can leverage enough unsafety to bind
global variables like `h$ret1` and specific registers such as `$r1`. The system
provides some lightweight checking through parsing. The nuances of the
JavaScript platform are generally abstracted over and the FFI system is tuned
for performance critical scenarios. So why change it?

The short answer is to hit deadlines. By skipping the FFI parsing the JS Backend
team was able to produce a working (can output &ldquo;Hello World!&rdquo;, and compile GHC&rsquo;s
boot libraries), integrated, JS backend in GHC faster than had we finished the
FFI system.

For the time being, we have opted to replaced each foreign function call with a
JavaScript fat arrow, for example:

    foreign import javascript unsafe "(($1_1,$1_2) => { return h$base_st_size($1_1,$1_2); })"
       st_size :: Ptr CStat -> IO Int64

 Of course, this situation is untenable, as argued above, FFI code is assumed to
be used in performance critical code, and thus any extra overhead, such as a
function closure and consequent indirection, must be avoided. But fear not! In
the near future we&rsquo;ll be overhauling the FFI system and returning it to its
former glory.

