---
slug: 2022-08-19-ghcjs-heap-representation
title: GHCJS heap representation
date: August 19, 2022
authors: [ sylvain ]
tags: [ ghc, javascript ]
---

## Introduction

I recently gave a short presentation about heap objects representation in GHCJS and hence in the upcoming JS backend for GHC. This post is a summary of the content.

## Heap objects

GHC implements Haskell code evaluation by using graph reduction. As such Haskell
programs compiled by GHC use the heap to store nodes of the graph to be
reduced and utility nodes participating in graph reduction. These nodes are:

- FUN: functions with their free variables as payload
- THUNK: suspensions with their free variables as payload
- PAP: partial application to a FUN. FUN closure and already applied arguments
  as payload.
- IND: indirection to another heap object
- BLACKHOLE: used to overwrite a THUNK when it is being evaluated

The heap is also used to store other values:

- CON: boxed values (saturated constructor applications) with field values as payload
- Other unlifted values: TSO, BCO, arrays, MutVar#, MVar#, TVar#, stacks, stack frames...

## Info tables

Many heap objects share the same properties: e.g. all `Int` CON objects are
exactly the same except for their payload (the `Int#` value) that may be
different.
Hence heap objects are split in two parts to allow sharing of common properties:
- info table: statically known properties (at compilation time) that can be
  shared by several heap objects
- heap object itself: dynamically allocated in the heap

Heap objects always have the same layout in the native code generated by GHC.
They are composed of:
- a pointer to an info table
- some words of payload

Heap traversal is done by following the info table pointer of every heap
object to query in the info table the layout of the heap object payload.

Info tables contain a pointer to a function called "entry code" that can be
specific to each info table. This code is mainly used to apply a node to some
arguments.
Note that with tables-next-to-code optimisation enabled, to avoid an
indirection the info table pointer is actually a pointer to this entry code and
the info table itself is stored in the words preceeding the entry code.

## Heap objects in JavaScript

GHCJS represents most heap objects with a JavaScript object having the following
fields:

```yaml
{ f, d1, d2, m, cc }
```

One question I had was: why don't we use a JS array instead of a JS object?
Arrays should be faster than objects (i.e. hashmaps), no? It turns out that
objects like this are optimised by JS engines using "hidden classes" (see
https://v8.dev/blog/fast-properties for an explanation). That's why
they are usually more efficient than arrays for which bound checking must be
made. Also arrays are larger in memory because they need to store their size.

Let's now discuss the fields of the heap objects.

### f field

"f" is the equivalent of the info table pointer. It contains a JavaScript
function that is the entry code for the heap object.

Similar to the tables-next-to-code optimisation discussed above, we use the
fact that JS functions are objects which have properties to store the info
table fields as properties of the function itself.

Example of an info table / entry function:

```javascript
[Function: h$entry_function_xyz]
  { t    // (Int) object type
  , size // (Int) number of fields in payload (-1 if variable layout)
  , i    // (Array) fields layout (empty if variable layout)
  , n    // (String) object name for debug
  , a    // (Int) function arity or constructor tag
  , r    // (Int) arity in number of JS variables
  , s    // (Array) static refs that must be kept alive (SRT)
  , m    // GC mark
  }
```

### d1, d2 fields

The d1 and d2 fields contain the payload of the heap object: constructor fields,
function free variables, etc.

Payloads can be composed of zero, one, or many fields. A naive solution would be
to have on JS object field (d1, d2, d3...) per payload field. However it would
be bad for two reasons:

- performance: JS engine hidden classes optimisation mentioned above need
  objects to have the same number of properties.

- genericity: we couldn't write generic functions (e.g. to copy a closure)
  without dynamically querying the number of fields composing the payload.


Another solution would be to use a single field to store the whole payload. It
would fulfill the genericity constraint. However performance may not be good
because of the extra allocation of the object containing the payload and the
indirection to access its fields.

Instead GHCJS uses a middle ground approach: it always uses only two JS object
fields to store any number of payload fields. The following encoding is used to
stash any number of payload fields into two JS fields:

| Payload      | d1       | d2                  |
|--------------|----------|---------------------|
| []           | null     | null                |
| [a]          | a        | null                |
| [a,b]        | a        | b                   |
| [a,b,c]      | a        | {d1=b,d2=c}         |
| [a,b,c,d...] | a        | {d1=b,d2=c,d3=d...} |

It still fulfills the genericity constraint and small objects (up to two fields
of payload) don't pay for an extra allocation/indirection. The price to pay is
that two fields of payload are always allocated, even for for objects with 1
field of payload.

It would be interesting to benchmark the performance of the different payload
representations.


### m field

The "m" field is used both for reachability checking (~ garbage collection) and
to implement the "stable names" features.

GHCJS can't rely on the JS engine to know when a heap object is collected. So it
implements its own heap traversal algorithm for this. The "m" field is used as a
marker for this algorithm (it will be the topic of a future blog post).
In this case, the "m" field is a number (a GC mark).

When a StableName is created for an object, the "m" field of the object is
updated to point to the StableName object:

```javascript
[h$StableName]
  { m // GC mark
  , s // stable name unique id
  , ...
  }
```

The "m" field of the StableName object is used in replacement of the mark of the object.

### cc field

The "cc" field is the cost center associated to the heap object. This field is
only present when profiling mode is enabled. Cost centers are entered (pushed on
the cost center stack of the current thread) before the evaluation of thunks and
function applications.

Cost centers are allocated with the `h$CC` function.


## Other heap object representation

The generic heap object representation presented above is only used for some
objects: those involved in graph reduction (e.g. updatable objects) and values
that don't have a fixed layout (e.g. CON objects have different layouts
depending on which constructor they represent). The object layout allows generic
access to the infotable and to the payload, and the infotable describes the
object type and the payload layout.

Several other objects don't need this machinery: they always have the same
layout and are never the result of a reduction (they are unlifted values). These
objects are represented as JS objects with any field they need (i.e. not using
the d1/d2 encoding above). To determine the type of such heap objects, instead
of using the "type" field of an infotable the code uses the `instanceof`
operator. For example a TSO is represented as a `h$Thread` object.

Note that we could imagine every heap object being recognised with `instanceof`
(or by matching on the `constructor` property) by having one separate object
name for all heap objects. It would mean adding `h$Con`, `h$Thunk`, `h$Fun`,
`h$Pap`, `h$Blackhole`, and `h$StackFrame` objects. Then all the heap objects
could be treated in the same way. However the isssue is that these objects need
to be overwritable in place: a Thunk becomes a Fun/Con/Pap/Blackhole, etc. So
they have to be instances of the same JS object.

### Optimised representation

Sometimes the generic heap object representation is unnecessary. For example, a
boxed `Int` would be represented as a `CON` heap object with the `Int#` in its
payload, represented as a JavaScript number value. The only thing we can do with
this heap object is to pass it around and to extract its payload. As such, it is
more memory efficient to directly pass the payload (a JS number).

GHCJS provides an optimisation that consists in automatically unboxing some CON
heap objects. For example, Haskell booleans (True and False datacons) are
directly mapped to JavaScript booleans, boxed numbers (Float, Double, Int, Word,
Int8, etc.) are directly mapped to JavaScript numbers.

We can do this because JavaScript already provides some boxing of its own: we
can use the `typeof` operator on a heap object to know if it is a JS object, a
JS number, a JS boolean, etc. It makes it possible to distinguish between heap
object representations. In comparison, we can't do this with the native (non-JS)
backend when we only have a pointer to a heap object: the pointer doesn't carry
the kind of value it points to, hence the pointed memory location must be
generic enough for this introspection to be performed (e.g. using infotable
pointers).
