---
slug: 2023-01-26-ghc-update
title: GHC DevX Update 2023-01-26
authors: [sylvain,doyougnu,luite,josh]
tags: [ghc]
---

This is the second biweekly update of the IOG GHC DevX team.
You can find the previous one [here](https://engineering.iog.io/2023-01-12-ghc-update).

## JS backend

### Template Haskell

Sylvain continued his work on the implementation of Template Haskell for the JS
backend.
He factorized the code from `iserv` and `libiserv` into the `ghci` library,
making GHC able to easily load and run the external interpreter server (`iserv`)
compiled into JavaScript in a NodeJS instance.
He modified GHC to avoid creating ByteCode objects (which are unsupported by the
JS backend) and to instead compile and link JavaScript codes.

It went smoothly and Template Haskell basically works with the JS backend now,
except for a few corner cases (e.g. one-shot mode) that should be fixed in the
coming days/weeks.

Luite modified Sylvain's JS code to fix support for Darwin and Windows. If you
want to test it, a draft merge request has been opened:
https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/9779

### JS backend in the browser tutorial

Josh published a tutorial about using code produced by the JS backend in a Web
page:
https://engineering.iog.io/2023-01-24-javascript-browser-tutorial


### Cabal support for js-sources

Sylvain added tests to his patch adding cabal support for the `js-sources`
stanza when GHC is used as a compiler (and not only when GHCJS is used as a
compiler), allowing the patch to be merged:
https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8636

https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8639 is still open though so be careful
if you try to use `js-sources`, they still don't work in some cases.


### JS backend CI

TODO: Jeff, CI MRs status

### FileStat

Josh opened an MR to match the layout of the JavaScript `fileStat` with the
layout of the equivalent struct defined in Emscripten's `stat.h`. This is needed
to ensure that hsc2hs features work correctly with this data type. Hsc2hs features
can peek at memory locations directly without using accessor functions, and the
memory locations are taken from the header file, hence the requirement to match
these layouts.

This MR only touches JavaScript files, so we're waiting on the approval of the
JS CI before continuing. For more information, see
https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22573

### JavaScript RTS refactor

Josh refactored parts of the GHC.StgtoJS.Rts.Rts module to remove special cases
from one of the n-argument JS RTS functions, combining these cases into the
general case and allowing for a few simplifications to the module's code.

Extra caching, in the form of lookup `Array`s, was also introduced for names
that were commonly used in the generated JavaScript ASTs. Previously, names
such as `x1` would require allocation each use, first allocating a `String`,
which was then converted to a GHC `FastString`, and finally wrapped in a JS
AST data constructor. Now, the resulting AST can be looked up directly from
the `Array`.

For the full set of refactors, see:
https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22822

### JS EDSL

TODO: Jeff


### Blog posts

Luite has been working on new blog posts about internals of the GHC JavaScript
backend and a strategy guide for debugging the generated JavaScript code. These
will be published in the coming weeks.

### JS backend configuration issue in a Docker image

Sylvain debugged a configuration issue of GHC with the JS backend (see
[#22814](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22814)).
The recommended way to configure is to use the following command line:

```
emconfigure ./configure --target=js-unknown-ghcjs
```

where `emconfigure` is provided by the Emscripten project and sets appropriate
environment variables (CC, LD, AR...).

However in some cases it seems like these variables are set as follows:

```
CC=emcc
LD=emcc
...
```

in which case GHC's `configure` script will silently ignores them... and uses the
C compiler for the host platform instead (x86-64, aarch64...). As the C compiler
is only used for the CPP pass, it results in some inscrutable errors. In #22814
the error is due to `CSize` being inferred as a 64-bit type while it should be
32-bit for the JavaScript platform, leading to CSize values being passed as 2
arguments in FFI calls while the callee expects 1.

Calling `configure` with the right environment variables fixes the issue:

```
./configure CC=$(which emcc) LD=$(which emcc) --target=js-unknown-ghcjs
```


### Discussion about JS backend maturity

Quite some time was spent discussing users' expectations about the JS and WASM backends.
We would like to make it very clear that even if GHCJS has been here for a long time,
the JS backend doesn't yet have the same level of maturity.

Bugs, missing features, and sub-par performance are to be expected in the 9.6 release.
We encourage adventurous users to try out this release and send us feedback, but it's
best to exercise caution before relying on it for production.

## Compiler performance

### More-strict `break`

Josh did more investigation into the performance difference that introducing
some strictness into the `break` function would make. The STG and microbenchmarks
are very promising, but using the "compile cabal" benchmark, there doesn't seem
to be a noticable time difference caused by the change. In terms of memory, it
seems to reduce GC copying, but slightly increase overall allocations and total
memory usage.

There's pathological cases in using a strict break by default - for example in the
`lines` function. Because of this, it's likely that this optimisation would have
the most benefit if applied in isolated cases in GHC, if any pathological lazy
cases are found.

## Misc

### Cross-compilation from Linux/Darwin to Windows

Ticket [#22805](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22805) reminded Sylvain that he had made [MR !9310](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/9310) more than two months ago to fix the same issue: cross-compilation from Linux/Darwin to Windows. The MR has now been updated, tested, reviewed, and merged.

### Hadrian rules to build the Sphinx-based docs

Sylvain started working on adding a chapter about the JavaScript in GHC's Users Guide.
The first step was to fix Hadrian's build rules for the Users Guide ([MR !9795](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/9795))
